detachment of forward air controllers stationed
at the main. And there was a great deal of
interaction, both radio and ground, between the
American advisers to the Vietnamese, especially
my group, and the facts. They would, on occasion,
we'd bring them out and let them meet the and on
occasion the Americans would go into Da Nang Air
Force Base and talk to them on a social level rather
than an operating level or business level, as you
might think. Because they felt and we felt that it
was desirable for us to know one another. and we
became fairly close friends. And they would many
times stretch their capability in protecting us
if we needed assistance.
On numerous occasions, we forward air
controllers would go in with fumes in their tanks
after knowing that they had just enough fuel to
make it back to their home Air Force base. As long as
we needed them and they could, they stayed on the
station and were able to bring in either the C-130
gunships or what they call the fast-movers, the
fighter bombers. And on many occasions, I say that
they saved lots of friendly lives by their
dedication. And they were not particular,
whether it was Vietnamese and American advisors
on the ground or U.S. Marines on the ground. They
stayed as long as they possibly could, so long as
they could perform a service for us. As advisor to
the 51st Army Regiment, specifically, what were
your duties? As a battalion advisor, I assisted
the battalion commander and his operations
officer in planning operations, planning
defenses, laying out the defenses that we felt
were necessary in our home.
operational area we had a barbed wire enclosure
where we where we lived we built those with our own
hands with sandbags and lumber and barbed wire and
so forth i
was the coordinator for artillery and the united
states
whether it be aviation helicopters or whether it
be
fighter bombers or gunships, the C-130 gunships I
was talking about, the C-47 gunship. I'm sure you
heard the nickname, Puff the Magic Dragon. Those
were our responsibilities.
in our area of operation all the Marine artillery
fire. By that I mean before the Marines fired
artillery fire within our area, they would call us
and ask us if we had friendly troops within the
area. And we coordinated with the Vietnamese. We
would, for instance, if the Marine battalion
commander or operations officer came to our
Tactical Operations Center to coordinate
something, we would sit in on it and make sure that
there were no mistakes about who was going to do
what and where. By the same token, if we, the
battalion commander and I, are My operations
officer went to the Marine Battalion Operations
Center. We'd go along and make sure that there were
no mistakes in communications. We were, I suppose
you might say, facilitators of communications.
We suggested to the battalion commander, I did,
and later to the regimental commander and
operations officer, areas that it would be
advisable to operate in.
We were also tasked for something that I never
really cared for, but it seemed to be a fact of life,
and that is attempting to persuade a battalion
commander to do something at the request of the
regimental advisor or perhaps the court advisor,
that we should do some sort of thing that they had
not been used to doing. We were his artillery
planner also. With all the troops there at that
time, what do you feel was the impact of their
presence on the Vietnamese society, culture, and
economy?
The
number of troops contributed significantly to
inflation. It contributed somewhat to the moral
decay of certain elements of the Vietnamese
populace.
It contributed a great deal to the modernization
and Honda-ization of the streets of the major
cities.
It
did not favorably affect the Vietnamese
civilization as such. However, I don't believe
that it harmed it as much as some might have
thought.
Modernization, I believe, probably outweighed
the moral decay and the modernization.
I really believe that it did.
You mentioned in your first tour that you were
working, you were trying to develop cottage
industries or to bring industry to the
Montagnards. Were you able to see at this point in
time any results of that attempt, of the American
attempts at industrialization in Vietnam? I was
never fortunate enough to be able to go back again
to any of the places that I had been before, except
the area around and just south of Da Nang and south
of Marble Mountain. It was actually a number of
marble up-thrusts. And the only areas that I was
able to actually visit again that I had worked in
before were the electricity in the south of Marble
Mountain. And I can't give you an answer that you
asked for.
What did the men do in Vietnam for R&R? Were the
five-day R&Rs morale boosting or successful?
You're referring to the... Rest and relaxation.
The in-country R&R, I never took one. I don't, and I
never had the opportunity to know anyone who
really did. I believe some of the Marines might
have. There was an R&R, Marine R&R area on the beach
at the name. China Beach? Yes, China Beach. I was
there and it was, when I say I was there, that was
where the exchange was. and the Navy Exchange or
Army Air Force Exchange, I'm not sure which. There
was one there, and I was there a few times. I
primarily went to the Exchange at the name Air
Force Base. But it was right next to the orphanage
that I had worked with. But again, it was off limits
to U.S. troops by this time. and I was in a different
category, and I could not even go downtown without
special permission from the, I guess, Air Force
provost marshal. I'm not sure who was in charge of
the name, but I did not wish to become involved in an
incident. So I did not visit my friends for a couple
of times during that period of time because they
knew as well as I. But I did get to see them on
frequent occasions at the McVie Officers Club
where this missionary, Mr. Smith, was able to come
and get his mail. And he was
given special privileges because of his
nationality and the fact that he had helped the
friendly forces from time to time in interfacing
with the local government. Back to the R&R.
For instance, during my tour in 68 and 69, for
myself and the people who worked with me, that you
could see the different physical condition of the
people when they came back. And I know myself that
the rest and relaxation was a tremendous to
renew the physical animal. Where did they go when
they went out of country? As I recall, we had R&R
centers in Australia, Bangkok, Hong Kong, Japan,
and Hawaii. There may have been more, but I don't
remember. I took my own R&R to Hawaii in 1968-69.
During the 1968-69 R&R, it was not as bad. The
publicity was not as bad. in Hawaii because Hawaii
is a military environment because of the
tremendous number of military that have been
there historically since prior to World War II.
It's been a Navy installation, it's been an Army
installation, and it's been a Marine Corps
installation. population of the Hawaiian
Islands, in my opinion, is heavily militarized,
meaning that there are ex-servicemen,
servicemen, wives, parents, relatives, and so
forth, and probably would not – did not represent a
true picture of the civilian world. I think
probably I
did not, and I think you're leading towards
something. How did the exposure to the U.S.
civilian affect the people who went on R&R? And it
did not bother most of us because we were not
exposed to the screams of baby killer,
criminal, murder, death, theft, and so forth at
that time. Not on Hawaii. It might have been
different had we come back all the way to the
continent of the United States. morale
degrading thing. It was a restful renewal.
Is this what was the stack arms? Is that part of the
program? I'm not familiar with the term as being a
program. I know the term stack arms has been around
the military for all my adult life that i know of the
military and it means quit it just means quit this
whatever we're doing back home and of course you
you do know that this is a command and it means
exactly that you stack your arms and leave them for
whatever reason and
How was your ability to communicate with the
Vietnamese at this point in time? And how
important do you think it was?
By this point in time, most of the officers, if not
100% of them, were able to speak English. And even
though I had gone to language school, a longer
course at the Defense Language Institute to learn
Vietnamese. They seemed to trust their English
better than they trusted my Vietnamese. And I
believe this was true with all of the officers that
I knew during that period of time. A few of them
spoke broken English. Most of them spoke
grammatically correct, if not totally literate
English. They, with some few exceptions, they
spoke with a heavy accent, but they were
understandable. My Vietnamese was poor, to say
the least. I was able to communicate with the
lower-ranking individuals on a very basic level.
And in many cases, in fact most cases, dealing with
the Vietnamese private PFC, it was a mixture of
Pidgin English, Pidgin Vietnamese, and some
French. They
knew, in most cases, some French, but I didn't know
much French. After
we began to become acquainted with one another,
we were able to communicate with sign language.
words that were common to both of us. And as a last
resort, I was able to, in most cases, write out in
Vietnamese what I wanted or what I needed to
convey.
I did understand enough was able to write enough
Vietnamese, even though my accent was probably
atrocious, to convey simple thoughts.
What about troop rotation and command rotation?
Do you think there were too many officers in
Vietnam? Did the troops... In other words, did the
troops rotate too frequently or frequently
enough, or were there not enough troops, or were
there too many? It's been said that there were too
many officers in Vietnam. Do you feel that way? How
did the committee rotate? The officers that
enlisted were officially rotated on the same
schedule. One year in country was all it took.
There was
no particular problem
that I saw.
The statistics, as I recall reading, was that the
support base was tremendous in accordance with
the actual
troop on the ground. But at the same time, you'll
have to remember that this was a Charlie.
The aviation assets were used to support all
forces, and we were supporting both the U.S.
military, the Vietnamese military, At least one
case, the Korean military with aviation assets,
and they are very much maintenance and
support-oriented, meaning that for one pilot
you're going to have 10 to 15, at least 10 to 15
people working on that aircraft and bringing in
support, whether it be mechanics, armorers, or
electronics experts. I don't believe that the
great support required in this particular war, or
the support that we had in this war, would be much
different from any other guerrilla-type war that
we would fight. Perhaps, yes, it was overburdened
with service. troops in only one area, and that was
the area of comfort and supply, the exchanges and,
of course, the amount of transportation that is
required to bring in the beer, cigarettes, and
nice things to eat. But at the same time, it's what
we were more or less used to and what we wanted, and
the people in command People at higher levels felt
that it was desirable to do so. I can't fault them
for it because I personally took advantage of the
comfort items when I could get them. Realizing as
you do that I spent that particular tour with the
Vietnamese. And without those comfort items, I
don't know that I would have been as an effective
soldier as I was. Now, I will have to say that on many
occasions and instances, I shared those comfort
items with the Vietnamese. And at the same time,
they shared what they had with me. I ate their rice
and weeds, and they didn't particularly like my
sea rations. But we existed together.
Do you feel the reserves should have been called
up?
Tactically, strategically, no. However,
politically, yes. I believe that if the reserves
had been called up, that the political situation
as it later I believe
that the chain bondage of the world and of the
United States would have been a
The fact that we fought this war with new
conscripts, new draftees, and with regular
soldiers
was very distasteful to many of the
political-minded people of the United States. I
believe that had the reserves been called up and
possibly have shortened the involvement that the
political situation would have been different.
To what extent or how it would have been different,
I do not know. Possibly the dissatisfaction would
have come along quicker and caused a more
intensive effort, or whether it would have
resulted in the people of the United States as a
whole being stronger behind our military, I don't
know. It's a question that I have no firm opinions
on either way.
The last tour that you had in Vietnam was from
December 1971 to 72. You were the personnel and
administrative advisor to 7th ARVN Division in
4th Corps ARVN. What was the difference between
being an advisor in the north and in the south?
The...
Again, this was a totally different terrain.
In the north, we had some lowland rice paddy areas,
primarily mountainous jungle.
In the In the south, we're talking of marsh, swamp,
and rice bedding. Were the people and troops
different? The people were about the same.
There was a sprinkling of Cambodians, ethnic
Cambodians,
in the south. quite a number of the soldiers were
head of Cambodian. They spoke Vietnamese and
Cambodian. And you could tell the difference by
appearance. Primarily they were less oriental
and more
Malay. experience a little bit darker in
complexion. But I would say that they had a little
greater
hatred of the NBA, the North Vietnamese Army.
They were a little bit more loyal appearing to me to
the Saigon government. Now, the people,
in all cases, in my experience, had no great love
for any government, whether it be the Saigon
government, the NDA, the North Vietnamese
government, or the Viet Cong shadow government.
As I intimated earlier on, they were loyal to their
family, their extended family, and their village
to some extent. But one must realize where their
loyalties were. The primary ambitions of all the
Vietnamese that I knew
except for the military, was to raise, grow rice,
kids, and adults, and to have their rice bowl full
every day. That is about the epitome of the local
peasant. Leave me alone, let me grow my children,
raise my children, grow my rice, and keep my rice
bowl full. And there did not appear to be much
ambition beyond this, those that, the Vietnamese
children that I knew. The school teachers, of
course, were wanting to impart their imprint upon
the younger children and to educate them as much as
they could. the Vietnamese had a high regard for
education, except for the very poorest and most
backward peasants who felt that taking his
working-age child away from him and putting him
into school was not exactly what was necessary. He
needed to be out planting the rice or
transplanting the rice. And of course, this was a
common occurrence.
How about the Arvin troops that you worked with?
Were they better or worse or any different from the
ones you worked with before? Again, we're talking
about the overall
throughout the division. And again, the manpower
base and the manpower pool is getting shallower
still. And again, we're getting people who are
less well-educated, not well-educated at all.
We're getting the pest. So the quality is
deteriorating. The overall quality of the new
troop is beginning to deteriorate. And I won't say
that it was... something that was
terribly important at that time because
in most cases it did not take a tremendous amount of
intelligence nor education to carry a right.
We found that We were beginning to receive nothing
but conscripts, and none of them wanted to be
there. Again, as you probably have heard, it was
impossible to tell by looking at a young conscript
whether he had sent these towards the VidCon,
whether he had sent these towards the Saigon
government, or none whatsoever. And we're
talking about 1971 and 72,
three years after the Tet Offensive.
Most of them would just as soon not be where they
were. They would prefer to be back on the rice paddy
or back in Saigon or one of the larger cities doing
something else. They were a fairly effective
fighting force if properly led, and this was
always the problem. As I may have stated before,
they were not as
eager, the officers, in command were not as eager
to pursue the battle because they knew that if they
lost a soldier or a large number of soldiers that
they had to bring in new conscripts and new people.
They knew that they were not going to leave Vietnam
in 12 months. They knew that they were going to be
military and with a long record of military
service, they knew that their success in the
military, and that was their chosen profession,
though this time many of them they had no other, and
they knew that their entire lives would be spent in
the military, and that the loss of men was not going
to reflect well on the
as well as the officers realizing and the NCOs,
too, realizing that they were mortal. Whereas
many of our officers, the U.S. officers did not at
that time realize how mortal they really were. I'm
referring primarily to the Lutonians and
Captains that developed mortality only, or
realization of mortality only came late within
their tour. And sometimes even the second tour
before they began to realize that, hey, I can get
killed in this mess too. Whereas the Vietnamese
were thoroughly aware of that
situation. Do you feel that they lost their own
home?
In effect, yes.
The Vietnamese lost the war and the United States
lost the war. And I can't place the blame on either
the United States nor the Vietnamese.
I would say that the Vietnamese lost the war
because of corruption at all levels, starting at
the presidential level, corruption favoritism,
nepotism, because they were looking out for
themselves and not even at the highest level did
the officer or civilian official really have
totally the best interest of their country at
heart. They had always in the backs of their minds,
in my belief, in my opinion, they were looking out
for number one. The United States lost their war
for whatever reason. I will very briefly say that
the United States lost the war because of lack of
resolution to win the war. And if you would like me
to expand on that, it was a combination of the
protestors, the very, very loud protesting
minority, and the lack of resolution to go against
that local minority by our civilians and
sometimes our military leaders, and allowing a
sanctuary to exist across a black line on a map that
does not exist on the ground, whether it be North
Vietnam
across the border into Laos or Cambodia. There
were occasions, as you know, where those black
lines were ignored, those artificial lines were
ignored, and the U.S. pursued the NVA to their
sanctuary and in some cases was successful in
destroying that sanctuary, not totally. It was
the lack of resolution to destroy
North Vietnam at the time that they could have been
destroyed. The
bombing of North Vietnam could have been very
successful had it been carried out with a total
effort, a total effort using what we had
available, rather than a half-hearted attempt or
as a warning. You do, if you don't stop doing this,
we're going to start bombing again, that type of
thing. The effort should have been, and I believe
that We could have won the war by, number one,
Congress declaring war against North Vietnam,
against North Vietnam for violating the CETO
treaties, that is, engaging in warfare against
our fellow treaty signers of South Vietnam, Laos,
Cambodia, whatever.
had we declared war against North Vietnam, we
would have then had the opportunity to actually
invade North Vietnam. I do not believe that such as
North Vietnam and subsequently invaded South
Vietnam, I do not believe that
we should have tied our own hands to such an extent
that we did. I believe that a war once started
should be pursued with vigor wherever the enemy
is. In your opinion, what way was the military
responsible
for the loss? I want me to pin it to one particular
thing. Perhaps the measurement of success or
failure of an operation depending upon body
count. Body count and the allied
things that go with it In many cases, the only means
of measuring the only yardstick against which a
commander was measured was body count. And to me,
being a more or less conventional soldier, I still
believe in taking the high ground and hold it.
attack where they're weakest and defend when they
attack and don't give an inch. But this was not the
manner in which the
U.S. civilian government determined that we
should fight and win the war. And again, it was a The
thing that the United States military, I'm
talking about all services, and the Vietnamese
were more or less hamstrung in being denied the
opportunity to go where they were.
When we knew where they were, we couldn't always go
to them. What did you think of defoliation?
I only had one opportunity, and before I was able to
arrange my only one opportunity where it was
needed, and that was at Camp Nandong in July of
1964. I was going to obtain some decodient for the
camp that was there. And unfortunately, it was
attacked and overwhelmed, and the camp was closed
before I could get The overall
program of defoliation, I saw some of the results
in the Delta IV Corps, and it didn't do a whole lot of
good. I was in and out of the areas before, during,
and after the defoliation. And while it took the
leaves off the trees and killed the rice paddy and
whatever, it did not result, in my opinion, of
winning the war. I don't think it lost it. I think
the idea was good. But unfortunately, Vietnam is a
pretty good place, a pretty good-sized place. and
it was just impossible to defoliate everything
everywhere they were. And I believe that it could
possibly have been used with much greater effect
along the Ho Chi Minh Trail. I think it would
probably have been able to
have been more successful had we operated
branches along the the area along
the – in Laos. Had we done it in Laos, where the Ho Chi
Minh Trail came into out of North Vietnam into the
area west of South Vietnam, I think we could have
probably devoted a lot more there of the
defoliant, and it would have been more
successful. it would have probably made the Ho Chi
Minh Trail more vulnerable to bottom attack and so
forth. Overall, what kind of military tactics
were used?
That covers the whole spectrum. From time to time,
during During the summer offensive in 1972,
as I recall, or summer defensive, depending on
which way you're looking at it, we had actual
World War II.